| FATIP | Title                   | Status | Category       | Author                             | Created   |
| ----- | ----------------------- | ------ | -------------- | ---------------------------------- | --------- |
| 0     | Fungible Token Standard | Draft  | Token Standard | Devon Katz \<<devonk@dbgrow.com>\> | 7-23-2018 |



# Summary

This document describes the functionality, datastructures, and validation rules
of the **FAT-0** token standard. FAT-0 is a data-only, fungible token standard
built on Factom chains and entries. Its functionality is most alike to the
ERC-20 token standard of Ethereum.


# Motivation

Create a decentralized, open token standard on top of the Factom protocol. The
FAT-0 standard allows issuance and trade tokenized assets between Factoid
addresses.

Following the Factom ethos, FAT standards are data-only protocols, and can be
implemented on top of any system that supports immutable ordered data, such as
Factom.

FAT-0 fills a critical gap between Colored Coins (BTC) and ERC (Ethereum)
tokens. Implementation of the FAT-0 standard on Factom results in an immutable,
fixed cost token system that is inexpensive to build, issue, and transfer
tokens on:

- $0.012 USD to issue a new FAT-0 token
  - Additional $0.001 USD/KB of optional user defined content up to 10KB
- $0.001 USD to transact an unlimited number of tokens
  - Additional $0.001 USD/KB of optional user defined content up to 10KB

Because the standard supports arbitrary user defined data, it offers a base for
more complex user defined behavior based on the underlying data. Custom token
systems may be built on top of the basic functionality of this standard.

Applications include ICOs, digital currencies, digital goods, and accounting.


# Specification

## Token ID

A human readable string unique to the Issuer's Identity Chain ID. This ID and
the Issuer's Identity Chain ID are the only pieces of data needed to retrieve
the token's data from Factom. It should be something short and memorable
related to your token. For example: `mytoken` is the token ID of the FAT-0 test
token: My Token (MYT).

TODO: Add example issuer id for this example token.

Note that two Issuers could use the same Token ID since the Issuers will have
different Identity Chain IDs. It is up to users to decide which Issuer's token
they wish to use. Trust in an Issuer is necessary to trust the integrity of
future token distribution decisions.


## Addresses

FAT-0 uses Factom's [Factoid
Address](https://github.com/FactomProject/FactomDocs/blob/master/factomDataStructureDetails.md#human-readable-addresses)
key pairs based on ed25519 cryptography to send and receive tokens.


### Reserved Coinbase & Burn Address

The public Factoid Address `FA1zT4aFpEvcnPqPCigB3fvGu4Q4mTXY22iiuV69DqE1pNhdF2MC`,
representing the public address corresponding to the Factoid private key with all zeros (`Fs1KWJrpLdfucvmYwN2nWrwepLn8ercpMbzXshd1g8zyhKXLVLWj`) is a reserved address for minting and
burning tokens.

Only coinbase transactions are allowed from this address, which must be signed
by the identity of the token issuer. Tokens sent to this address are provably
un-spendable (burnt). This address is not allowed to send tokens from its
balance under any circumstance.



## Token Chain

A Factom chain is used to hold the token issuance and transactions of
the token. The Factom Blockchain provides a fixed ordering of transactions and issuances, a requirement for determining consensus around the state of balances and transaction validation.




### Token Chain ID `extends` [FATIP-100](100.md)

The Token Chain ID can be calculated by using the Issuer's Identity Chain ID
and the Token ID. The token chain has the following External IDs.

| External ID Index | External ID Value                            |
| ----------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| 0                 | "token"                                      |
| 1                 | \<Hex Encoded Token ID>                      |
| 2                 | "issuer"                                     |
| 3                 | \<Hex Encoded Issuer Identity Root Chain ID> |

For example, for FAT-0 token `mytoken`:

```
Chain ID = sha256(sha256("token") | sha256("mytoken") | sha256("issuer") | sha256("888888dd9e60c1f0216f753caf5c9b5be4c9ca69db27a6c33d30dce3fe5ee709"))
Chain ID = 0x85ab32f9748bf4c24cedb301bc5a4938eb5cd4a5b0bb46b70027bf983f579a2e
```

Where sha256d is a double round of sha256 hashing: `sha256d(x) =
sha256(sha256(x))`

### Token Issuance Entry `extends` [FATIP-101](101.md)

A data structure called the Token Issuance holds the information about the
FAT-0 token such as it's name, symbol, and supply.

The official issuance entry is the first well-formed entry on the token's
token chain that has a valid signature from the Issuer's SK1 key identified
by the Issuer's Identity Chain.

There may only be one issuance entry per FAT-0
token. It should be noted that due to the implementation of [FATIP-100](100.md) in this spec, the signed issuance entry cannot be the first entry in the token chain, since it's ExtIDS must be exact. The issuance entry may occur at any position in the chain. Invalid entries are simply ignored.

From [FATIP-101](101.md), the `data` being signed shall be the Chain ID of the token chain concatenated with the entry content. The `issuer` shall be the hex encoded Issuer Identity Root Chain ID used in chain ID derivation, and the `IDKey` used shall be the IDKey of `issuer` at the time of entry to Factom.


#### Issuance Entry Content Example

```json
{
  "type": "FAT-0",
  "supply": 10000000,
  "name": "Example Token",
  "symbol": "EXT",
  "salt": "874220a808090fb736f345dd5d67ac26eab94c9c9f51b708b05cdc4d42f65aae",
}
```


#### Issuance Entry Field Summary & Validation

| Name   | Type   | Description                                                  | Validation                                                   | Required |
| ------ | ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------- |
| type   | string | The type of this token issuance                              | Must equal 'FAT-0'                                           | Y        |
| supply | number | The maximum possible number of tokens that can be in circulation | Must be greater than 0 if included. Omission means supply is unlimited | N        |
| name   | string | The display name of the token                                | none                                                         | N        |
| symbol | string | The display symbol of the token                              | must be A-Z, and 1-4 characters in length                    | N        |
| salt   | string | Random string to salt the issuance                           | user defined. Optional                                       | N        |

#### Issuance Entry External IDs Summary & Validation

| External ID Index | Type            | Description                                                  | Validation                                                   | Required |
| ----------------- | --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------- |
| 0                 | raw binary data | Raw ed25519 signature output of signing issuance `chainID` + entry content. | ed25519 signature validation (`chainID`+ entry content, `idKey`, `ExtID[0]`) | Y        |



### Token Transaction Entry `extends` [FATIP-101](101.md)

Token Transaction Entries represent the signed transfer of an amount of FAT-0
tokens from one Factoid address to another. Anyone who wishes to make a transaction must create a
well-formed entry with a valid signature on the token's chain.

The order of transactions is solely determined by the order the transaction
entries appear in the token chain. Factom provides a locked, time ordered
record of submission for each transaction. The presense of a Transaction Entry
in the chain is necessary but not sufficient for the transaction to be
considered valid. Sufficient balance, valid signatures, as well as some other
requirements to prevent replay attacks are described below.

FAT-0 transactions borrow cryptographic elements from Factoid Transactions,
including it's RCD (Redeem Condition Datastructure) address format, and
signatures. FAT-0 transactions are multi-input, multi-output (MIMO).

For standard transactions, RCDs and corresponding signatures are provided in
the External IDs of the Transaction Entry. For coinbase transactions that
initially distribute tokens, the signatures are provided in the structure of
the entry as described by FATIP-101.

#### Transaction ID

The unique ID of a transaction is its entry hash in the Factom blockchain. This
is a unique hash of all of the data in the content and the External IDs of the
entry.


#### Transaction Entry Content Example

```json
{
   "inputs:":{
      "FA1zT4aFpEvcnPqPCigB3fvGu4Q4mTXY22iiuV69DqE1pNhdF2MC": 100,
      "FA2y6VYYPR9Y9Vyy1ZuZqWWRXGXLeuvsLWGkDxq3Ed7yc11dbBKV": 50
   },
   "outputs:":{
      "FA3aECpw3gEZ7CMQvRNxEtKBGKAos3922oqYLcHQ9NqXHudC6YBM": 150
   },
   "salt":"80d87a8bd5cf2a3eca9037c2229f3701eed29360caa975531ef5fe476b1b70b5"
}
```


#### Transaction Entry JSON Field Summary & Validation

| Name      | Type   | Description                           | Validation                                                   | Required |
| --------- | ------ | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------- |
| `inputs`  | object | The inputs of this this transaction   | Mapping of Public Factoid Address => Input amount. Amount must be a positive nonzero integer (units of of 1^-10 of a token). Must contain at least 1 key-value pair. No duplicate keys. | Y        |
| `outputs` | object | The outputs of this transaction       | Mapping of Public Factoid Address => Input amount. Amount must be a positive nonzero integer (units of of 1^-10 of a token). Must contain at least 1 key-value pair. No duplicate keys. | Y        |
| `salt`    | string | Random string to salt the transaction | Must be at least 1 character long                            | Y        |


#### External IDs
Transaction Entries must include two External IDs for every input address listed in the transaction: the RCD
that hashes to the corresponding input address, and a signature.

Implementations should ignore any External IDs after the first `2n`, where `n`
is the number of input addresses with respect to Factoid address signing & verification process. This allows a user to optionally append any additional External IDs.

In the case of coinbase transactions, the last External ID is used to hold a signature of the issuing identity as per [FATIP-101](101.md). The `idNonce` being signed shall be the transaction `chain ID` concatenated with the entry content. The `IDKey` shall be the issuing identity's IDKey at the time of entry into Factom.

In the following table `X` is any even number less than `2n`.

| External ID Index          | External ID Value (RAW DATA)                                 |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 0                          | RCD corresponding to `input[0].address`                      |
| 1                          | ed25519 signature by key of RCD in preceding External ID     |
| ...                        |                                                              |
| `X`                        | RCD corresponding to `input[X/2].address`                    |
| `X + 1`                    | ed25519 signature by key of RCD in preceding External ID     |
| `ExtIds[ExtID.length - 1]` | Raw binary ed25519 signature output of signing transaction `chainID` + entry content.  ed25519 signature validation (`chainID`+ entry content, `idKey`, `ExtID[0]`) |



##### Encoding

All of the RCD and Signature External IDs in a Transaction Entry shall be raw
data and not use any encoding. The [Factom Explorer](https://explorer.factom.com/) now properly displays External IDs
that contain raw data as hex encoded data. So there is little reason to encode
the data we put in the External IDs.


##### RCD
The RCD is a data structure that hashes to the payload of a Factoid Address.
The RCD data structure is 33 bytes long. The first byte is the RCD type
(`0x01`), the remaining 32 bytes are a ed25519 public key.

Factoid Addresses contain a header and a checksum, which is described futher in
the [Factom Data Structures
Documentation](https://github.com/FactomProject/FactomDocs/blob/master/factomDataStructureDetails.md#human-readable-addresses).

To validate that an RCD "corresponds" to a Factoid Address,
1. Convert the Factoid Address string from base58 to raw bytes.
2. Remove the first 2 bytes header bytes and the last four bytes checksum
   bytes.
3. The remaining 32 bytes must be the double SHA256 hash of the raw bytes of
   the RCD.


##### Signature
The signature is the same as that used in a [Factoid
Transaction](https://github.com/FactomProject/FactomDocs/blob/master/factomDataStructureDetails.md#factoid-transaction).

From the Factom Documentation:
> - Factoids use Ed25519 with Schnorr signatures.  They have [many
>   benefits](https://ripple.com/uncategorized/curves-with-a-twist/0) over the
>   ECDSA signatures used in Bitcoin.
> - The signatures are enforced to be
>   [canonical](https://github.com/FactomProject/ed25519/blob/master/ed25519.go#L143).
>   This will limit malleability by attackers without the private key.

The signed data shall be the concatenation of the raw bytes of the chain ID and
the content of the entry.

```
signature = ed25519_sign(priv_key, chain_id + entry_content)
```

The chain ID is included to prevent replay attacks across FAT token chains.


### Transaction Validation and State

There are two types of transactions which have slightly different validation
requirements: Normal transactions between Factoid Addresses, and Coinbase
transactions that mint tokens. Coinbase transactions require an additional signature of the entry content by the issuer, stored in the transaction's ExtIds.

A Coinbase transaction is identified by whether it has an input from the
Coinbase address: `FA1zT4aFpEvcnPqPCigB3fvGu4Q4mTXY22iiuV69DqE1pNhdF2MC`

#### Computing the current state
Implementations must maintain the state of the balances of all addresses in
order to evaluate the validity of a transaction. The current state can be built
by iterating through all entries in the token chain and sequentially,
updating the state for any transaction that meets all of the necessary
Transaction Validation Requirements.

The following pseudo code describes how to compute the current state of all
balances. A transaction must be applied entirely or not at all. Entries that
are not valid transactions are simply ignored. Transactions must be evaluated
in the order that they appear in the token chain.

```
for entry in transaction_chain.entries:
    if entry.is_valid_transaction():
        if !entry.is_coinbase_transaction():
            for input in entry.inputs:
                balances[input.address] -= input.amount
        for output in entry.outputs:
            balances[output.address] += output.amount
```


#### Transaction Validation Requirements

All Transactions must meet all of the T.x requirements.

Normal Transactions must also meet all of the N.x requirements.

Coinbase Transactions must also meet all of the C.x requirements.

In general, requirements are ordered by the computational and programmatic ease
of checking.

The x.1.x requirements are generally data structure validations.

The x.2.x requirements are generally parsing and other content validations.

The x.3.x requirements are generally related to cryptographic validations.

##### T.x Requirements for all transactions

- T.1.1: The content of the entry must be a single well-formed JSON.
- T.1.2: The JSON must contain all required transaction fields listed in the
  above table. The fields must comply with all stated validation criteria. No
unspecified fields may be present.
- T.1.3: The sum of all values(amounts) in the `inputs` object must be equal to
  the sum of all values(amounts) in the `outputs` object.
- T.1.4: A Factoid Address may only appear ONCE in the `inputs` and `outputs`
  objects combined. This means that the "inputs" and "outputs" may not share
any common keys (Factoid Addresses), nor each have any duplicates.
- N.1.1: The entry MUST contain exactly `2n` External IDs, where `n` is the
  number of keys in the `inputs` object. This is required to prevent replay
attacks.
- T.2.1: The entry hash of the transaction entry must be unique among all
  transactions belonging to this token.
- T.3.1: If `i` is odd then the `i`th External ID must be the raw data of a
  valid signature of the raw bytes of the chain id bytes prepended to the raw
bytes of the content of the entry, verified against the public key stored in
the last 32 bytes of the RCD in the `i-1`th External ID.

##### N.x Requirements for normal account-to-account transactions

Normal transactions must meet all T.x and N.x requirements.

All references to External ID indexes use `0`-based indexing.

- N.2.1: The Coinbase address
  (`FA1zT4aFpEvcnPqPCigB3fvGu4Q4mTXY22iiuV69DqE1pNhdF2MC`) may not exist as a
key in `inputs`.
- N.2.2: The Factoid Addresses (keys) in `inputs` must all have balances
  greater than or equal to their respective input amounts.
- N.3.1: If `i` is even then the `i`th External ID must be the raw data of an
  RCD which hashes to the raw data payload of the human readable Factoid
Address in `inputs[i/2].address`.

##### C.x Requirements for Coinbase distribution transactions

Coinbase transactions must meet all T.x and C.x requirements.

- C.1.1: The `inputs` object may contain only the public coinbase address as a
  key (`FA1zT4aFpEvcnPqPCigB3fvGu4Q4mTXY22iiuV69DqE1pNhdF2MC`)
- C.2.1: The coinbase input amount plus the sum of tokens issued in all
  previous Coinbase transactions must be less than or equal to `supply` from
the Issuance entry (if not unlimited).
- C.3.1: The RCD in the first External ID must hash to the PK1 key of the Token
  Issuer's Identity Chain.


# Implementation

No implementation notes at this time.




# Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via
[CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
